Add blog post for troubleshooting the Target Allocator. (#4700)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/target-allocator-troubleshooting/index.md

If you’ve enabled
[Target Allocator](https://adri-v.medium.com/lets-learn-about-the-otel-operator-s-target-allocator-47a2b1f07562)
service discovery on the
[OTel Operator](https://adri-v.medium.com/list/opentelemetry-operator-0ee6378d630a),
and your metrics aren’t getting picked up, then there are a few troubleshooting
steps that you can take to help you understand what’s going on and to get things
back on track. I put these together based on some of my own experience. May
these help you on your own journey!

## Troubleshooting Steps

Before we start, be sure to check out
[this repository](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk),
which, among other things, includes examples of configuring the
`OpenTelemetryCollector` custom resource (CR) to use the Target Allocator’s
service discovery functionality, along with examples of
[`ServiceMonitor`](https://observability.thomasriley.co.uk/prometheus/configuring-prometheus/using-service-monitors/#:~:text=The%20ServiceMonitor%20is%20used%20to,build%20the%20required%20Prometheus%20configuration.)
and
[`PodMonitor`](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/user-guides/getting-started/#using-podmonitors)
resource definitions.

> ### 1- Did you actually deploy all of your resources to Kubernetes?

Reviewer: This step has a different tone than the rest of post. You might consider editing it to make the post more cohesive.

[API documentation](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.PodMonitor),
all of my configurations _looked_ correct. Yeah…too bad the resource wasn’t
actually deployed.

In a flash of inspiration, I decided to check to make sure that the `PodMonitor`
was _actually deployed to my Kubernetes cluster_, and lo and behold…it was
missing. After I deployed the `PodMonitor` (for real, this time), it worked. At
least I take comfort in the fact that my configurations were correct the whole
time! 🫠

So yeah…moral of the story: make sure you actually deploy your resources.

### 2- Is this thing even on?

After you’ve deployed all of your resources to Kubernetes, check to make sure
that the Target Allocator is actually picking up your
[`ServiceMonitor`](https://observability.thomasriley.co.uk/prometheus/configuring-prometheus/using-service-monitors/#:~:text=The%20ServiceMonitor%20is%20used%20to,build%20the%20required%20Prometheus%20configuration.)(s)
and/or
[`PodMonitor`](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/user-guides/getting-started/#using-podmonitors)(s).
Fortunately, we can check this pretty easily.

> Let’s suppose that we have this `ServiceMonitor` definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s suppose that you have this `ServiceMonitor` definition:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: sm-example
  namespace: opentelemetry
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
    release: prometheus
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-app
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
      - opentelemetry
  endpoints:
    - port: prom
      path: /metrics
    - port: py-client-port
      interval: 15s
    - port: py-server-port
```

and this `Service` definition:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: py-prometheus-app
  namespace: opentelemetry
  labels:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
spec:
  selector:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
  ports:
    - name: prom
      port: 8080
```

First, set up a `port-forward` in Kubernetes, so that you can expose the Target
Allocator service:

```shell
kubectl port-forward svc/<otel_collector_resource_name>-targetallocator -n <namespace> 8080:80
```

Where `<otel_collector_resource_name>` is the value of `metadata.name` in your
`OpenTelemetryCollector` CR, and `<namespace>` is the namespace to which the
`OpenTelemetryCollector` CR is deployed.

> Following the example from our
> [example repository](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk),
> ours would look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the
[example repository](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk),
yours looks like this:
```

```shell
kubectl port-forward svc/otelcol-targetallocator -n opentelemetry 8080:80
```

Next, get a list of jobs registered with the Target Allocator:

```shell
curl localhost:8080/jobs | jq
```

Your sample output should look something like this:

```json
{
  "serviceMonitor/opentelemetry/sm-example/1": {
    "_link": "/jobs/serviceMonitor%2Fopentelemetry%2Fsm-example%2F1/targets"
  },
  "otel-collector": {
    "_link": "/jobs/otel-collector/targets"
  },
  "serviceMonitor/opentelemetry/sm-example/0": {
    "_link": "/jobs/serviceMonitor%2Fopentelemetry%2Fsm-example%2F0/targets"
  },
  "serviceMonitor/opentelemetry/sm-example/2": {
    "_link": "/jobs/serviceMonitor%2Fopentelemetry%2Fsm-example%2F2/targets"
  },
  "podMonitor/opentelemetry/pm-example/0": {
    "_link": "/jobs/podMonitor%2Fopentelemetry%2Fpm-example%2F0/targets"
  }
}
```

Where `serviceMonitor/opentelemetry/sm-example/0` represents one of the
`Service` ports that the `ServiceMonitor`picked up:

> - `opentelemetry` is the namespace in which the `ServiceMonitor` resource
>   resides
> - `sm-example` is the name of the `ServiceMonitor`
> - `0` is one of the port endpoints matched between the `ServiceMonitor` and the
>   `Service`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `opentelemetry` is the namespace in which the `ServiceMonitor` resource
  resides.
- `sm-example` is the name of the `ServiceMonitor`.
- `0` is one of the port endpoints matched between the `ServiceMonitor` and the
  `Service`.
```

> We see a similar story with the port monitor, which shows up as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We see a similar story with the `PodMonitor`, which shows up as
```

          "__address__": "10.244.0.11:8082",
          "__meta_kubernetes_endpointslice_labelpresent_kubernetes_io_service_name": "true",
          "__meta_kubernetes_endpointslice_labelpresent_endpointslice_kubernetes_io_managed_by": "true",
          "__meta_kubernetes_service_annotation_kubectl_kubernetes_io_last_applied_configuration": "{\"apiVersion\":\"v1\",\"kind\":\"Service\",\"metadata\":{\"annotations\":{},\"labels\":{\"app\":\"my-app\",\"app.kubernetes.io/name\":\"py-otel-client\"},\"name\":\"py-otel-client-svc\",\"namespace\":\"opentelemetry\"},\"spec\":{\"ports\":[{\"name\":\"py-client-port\",\"port\":8082,\"protocol\":\"TCP\",\"targetPort\":\"py-client-port\"}],\"selector\":{\"app.kubernetes.io/name\":\"py-otel-client\"}}}\n",
          "__meta_kubernetes_pod_labelpresent_app_kubernetes_io_name": "true",
          "__meta_kubernetes_pod_container_port_protocol": "TCP",
          "__meta_kubernetes_service_label_app": "my-app",
          "__meta_kubernetes_endpointslice_labelpresent_app_kubernetes_io_name": "true"
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> **PS:** Shout out to
> [this blog post](https://trstringer.com/opentelemetry-target-allocator-troubleshooting/)

> > for educating me about this troubleshooting technique

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> for educating me about this troubleshooting technique.
```

### 3- Is the Target Allocator enabled? Is Prometheus service discovery enabled?

If the `curl` commands above don’t show a list of expected `ServiceMonitor`s and
`PodMonitor`s, then it’s time to dig a bit deeper.

One thing to remember is that just because you include the `targetAllocator`
section in the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR doesn’t mean that it’s enabled. You
need to explicitly enable it. Furthermore, if you want to use
[Prometheus service discovery](https://adri-v.medium.com/prometheus-opentelemetry-better-together-41dc637f2292),
you must explicitly enable it:

- Set `spec.targetAllocator.enabled` to `true`
- Set `spec.targetAllocator.prometheusCR.enabled` to `true`

So that your `OpenTelemetryCollector` resource looks like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1beta1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otelcol
  namespace: opentelemetry
spec:
  mode: statefulset
  targetAllocator:
    enabled: true
    serviceAccount: opentelemetry-targetallocator-sa
    prometheusCR:
      enabled: true
```

> 📝 You can see the full `OpenTelemetryCollector` resource definition
> [here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/02-otel-collector.yml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
📝 For more detail, see the full `OpenTelemetryCollector` [resource definition](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/02-otel-collector.yml).
```

### 4- Did you configure a ServiceMonitor (or PodMonitor) selector?

If you configured a
[`ServiceMonitor`](https://observability.thomasriley.co.uk/prometheus/configuring-prometheus/using-service-monitors/#:~:text=The%20ServiceMonitor%20is%20used%20to,build%20the%20required%20Prometheus%20configuration.)

> selector, it means that the Target Allocator will only look for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
selector, it means that the Target Allocator only looks for
```

`ServiceMonitors` having a `metadata.label` that matches the value in
[`serviceMonitorSelector`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollectorspectargetallocatorprometheuscr).

Suppose that you configured a
[`serviceMonitorSelector`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollectorspectargetallocatorprometheuscr)

> for your Target Allocator, like in the example below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for your Target Allocator, like in the following example:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1beta1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otelcol
  namespace: opentelemetry
spec:
  mode: statefulset
  targetAllocator:
    enabled: true
    serviceAccount: opentelemetry-targetallocator-sa
    prometheusCR:
      enabled: true
      serviceMonitorSelector:
        app: my-app
```

It means that your `ServiceMonitor` resource must in turn have that same value

> in `metadata.spec.label`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in `metadata.labels`:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: sm-example
  labels:
    app: my-app
    release: prometheus
spec:
```

> 📝 You can see the full `ServiceMonitor` resource definition
> [here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/04-service-monitor.yml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
📝 For more detail, see the full `ServiceMonitor` [resource definition](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/04-service-monitor.yml).
```

In this case, the `OpenTelemetryCollector` resource's
`prometheusCR.serviceMonitorSelector` is looking only for `ServiceMonitors`

> having the label `app: my-app`, which we see in the above example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
having the label `app: my-app`, which we see in the previous example.
```

> **_If your ServiceMonitor resource is missing that label, then the Target
> Allocator won’t pick up that ServiceMonitor._**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your ServiceMonitor resource is missing that label, then the Target
Allocator won’t pick up that ServiceMonitor.
```

> **NOTE:** The same applies if you’re using a
> [PodMonitor](https://prometheus-operator.dev/docs/user-guides/getting-started/#using-podmonitors).
> In that case, if your `OpenTelemetryCollector`resource defined a
> [`podMonitorSelector`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollectorspectargetallocatorprometheuscr),
> then any `PodMonitors` you wish to be picked up by the TargetAllocator would

> > need to have that same label.

Reviewer: Not sure this needs to be a call-out since you address other PodMonitor variations in the text, but I'm fine either way. If keeping the call-out, consider switching it to the docsy shortcode (for example, [this tip](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/blob/e7cbabb5fdf17b7e7355ec6723f69631d61400b3/content/en/docs/contributing/new-content.md?plain=1#L15)).

### 5- Did you leave out the serviceMonitorSelector and/or podMonitorSelector configuration altogether?

As we learned above, setting mismatched values for `serviceMonitorSelector` and

> `podMonitorSelector` will result in your `ServiceMonitors` and `PodMonitors`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`podMonitorSelector` results in your `ServiceMonitors` and `PodMonitors`,
```

respectively, not getting picked up.

But did you know that in
[`v1beta1`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollector-1)
of the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR, if you leave out this configuration

> altogether, your `PodMonitors` and `ServiceMonitors` may also not get picked up?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
altogether, your `PodMonitors` and `ServiceMonitors` might also not get picked up?
```

As of `v1beta1` of the `OpenTelemetryOperator`, you must include a
`serviceMonitorSelector`, and `podMonitorSelector`, even if you don’t intend to
use it, like this:

```yaml
---
prometheusCR:
  enabled: true
  podMonitorSelector: {}
  serviceMonitorSelector: {}
```

> See full example
> [here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/4c0eb425c90187d584c9d03b51ad918b377014a3/src/resources/02-otel-collector.yml#L15-L17).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [full example](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/4c0eb425c90187d584c9d03b51ad918b377014a3/src/resources/02-otel-collector.yml#L15-L17).
```

I just learned this today, as I was updating my `OpenTelemetryCollector` YAML
from
[`v1alpha1`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollector)
to
[`v1beta1`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollector-1).

### 6- Do your labels, namespaces, and ports match for your ServiceMonitor and your Service (or PodMonitor and your Pod)?

The `ServiceMonitor` is configured to pick up Kubernetes
[Services](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/)
that match on:

- Labels
- Namespaces (optional)
- Ports (endpoints)

Suppose that you have this `ServiceMonitor`:

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: sm-example
  labels:
    app: my-app
    release: prometheus
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-app
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
      - opentelemetry
  endpoints:
    - port: prom
      path: /metrics
    - port: py-client-port
      interval: 15s
    - port: py-server-port
```

> The above`ServiceMonitor` is looking for any services that have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous `ServiceMonitor` is looking for any services that have:
```

- the label `app: my-app`
- reside in a namespace called `opentelemetry`
- a port named `prom`, `py-client-port`, _or_ `py-server-port`

So for example, the `Service` resource below would get picked up by the
`ServiceMonitor`, because it matches the above criteria:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: py-prometheus-app
  namespace: opentelemetry
  labels:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
spec:
  selector:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
  ports:
    - name: prom
      port: 8080
```

> Conversely, the `Service` resource below would NOT, because the `ServiceMonitor`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conversely, the following `Service` resource would NOT, because the `ServiceMonitor`
```

is looking for ports named `prom`, `py-client-port`, _or_ `py-server-port`, and
this service’s port is called `bleh`.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: py-prometheus-app
  namespace: opentelemetry
  labels:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
spec:
  selector:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
  ports:
    - name: bleh
      port: 8080
```

> > **NOTE:** If you’re using `PodMonitor`, the same applies, except that it picks
> > up Kubernetes _pods_ that match on labels, namespaces, and named ports. You
> > can see an example `PodMonitor` resource definition
> > [here](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/04a-pod-monitor.yml).

Reviewer: Ditto my comment on the previous call-out. Also, for links, we try to use more descriptive words than "here" when possible.

```suggestion
> **NOTE:** If you’re using `PodMonitor`, the same applies, except that it picks
> up Kubernetes _pods_ that match on labels, namespaces, and named ports. For example, see this `PodMonitor` [resource definition](https://github.com/avillela/otel-target-allocator-talk/blob/main/src/resources/04a-pod-monitor.yml).
```
